ISPN-12810 marshalling and encoding title (#9106)
infinispan/infinispan: documentation/src/main/asciidoc/topics/con_cache_encoding.adoc

[id='encoding']
= Cache encoding
Encoding is the format, or media type, that {brandname} uses to store entries (key/value pairs) in caches.

[discrete]
== Remote caches

> {brandname} Server stores entries in remote caches as opaque `byte[]` with no type information.

Author: there are a couple of really great details in here and I've reworked the docs to address them. let's see how they look when I update.

You should always specify an encoding when you configure a remote cache.

> The encoding tells {brandname} what type of content you are storing in the cache.

Reviewer: Suggestion:

The encoding configures how the {brandname} will store entries in the cache. Without the configuration, {brandname} will store the entries as provided by a client without any transformation.  It's recommend to always configure an encoding if the cache is accessed by multiple clients, such as console, CLI, REST, Hot Rod, tasks or scripts, etc

> The encoding tells {brandname} what type of content you are storing in the cache.

Author: let's go with Gustavo's suggestion. I've expanded a little too. let's see how the changes look.

> The encoding tells {brandname} what type of content you are storing in the cache.

Author: @danberindei and @gustavonalle Thanks again, guys. Please let me know if the latest updates are good or if more changes are needed.

For complete {brandname} capabilities and optimal performance you should always use Protobuf encoding with the `application/x-protostream` media type.

[discrete]
== Embedded caches

By default, {brandname} stores entries in embedded caches as Plain Old Java Objects (POJOs).

Storing POJOs in embedded caches means that object instances are mutable.
For example if you store a `Map` any modifications to that object are reflected in the cache.

However, for clustered embedded caches, {brandname} needs to serialize any POJOs to `byte[]` arrays that can be replicated between nodes and then deserialized back into POJOs.
This requires you to configure a marshaller to perform serialization and deserialization for your embedded caches.

[TIP]
====
Instead of using clustered embedded caches, {brandname} recommends using remote caches that use ProtoStream encoding.

> Remote caches separate {brandname} cluster configuration from application logic, which greatly reduces complexity without any loss of performance.

Author: maybe let's just drop that part for brevity. at first I was saying that near caching techniques mean that read intensive applications don't need to cross the network for each call, which might allay concerns readers might have about using remote caches vs embedded.

[id='encoding']
= Cache encoding
Encoding is the format, identified by a media type, that {brandname} uses to store entries (key/value pairs) in caches.

[discrete]
== Remote caches

> {brandname} Server stores entries in remote caches without any encoding information for keys and values, which means remote caches use the `application/unknown` media type by default.

Reviewer 2: I'm still not 100% happy with this, it implies a causal relation. How about

```
{brandname} Server uses a single encoding to store all the keys (and a separate encoding for all the values) in a remote cache. The default encoding is `application/unknown`, meaning only the client knows the actual encoding.

Hot Rod and REST clients requests include a media type for keys and one for values.
```

Author: @danberindei Thanks, I think I see what you're getting at. I do have a question about your suggested text.

"and a separate encoding for all the values" - I read this to mean that `application/unknown` is for keys but there's something different for values. Is that the case? If so, then I think we'll need to clarify that further.

Could it be that the meaning is more along the lines of "the server uses the `application/unknown` media type to encode all keys and values, which have separate configurations"?

In this case maybe we should change back the ConfigurationBuilder to show the separate media type too?

Reviewer: Better not to leak ```application/unknown``` in the documentation, otherwise uses will start using it, it's a deprecated media type meant originally for internal usage only

Author: thanks @gustavonalle we've removed the reference to `application/unknown`

[id='encoding']
= Cache encoding
Encoding is the format, identified by a media type, that {brandname} uses to store entries (key/value pairs) in caches.

[discrete]
== Remote caches

> {brandname} Server stores entries in remote caches with the encoding that is set in the cache configuration.
> If the remote cache does not have any encoding configuration, {brandname} Server stores keys and values without any media type information.
> Hot Rod and REST clients also use encoding to operate on data and include a media type with each request to {brandname} Server.
> 
> If you do not configure encoding for remote caches then {brandname} Server stores keys and values exactly as the client sends them, discarding any media type information.
> When clients then request entries from these caches, {brandname} Server returns keys and values as they are stored in the remote cache and ignores the client's media type.
> When the remote cache has an encoding, other than `application/unknown`, {brandname} Server converts keys and values to and from the client media type with each request.

Reviewer: We can condense a bit this section at the same time introducing the basic data conversion mechanics, and getting rid of APPLICATION_UNKWOWN, which is a deprecated hack for backwards compatibility reasons:

```suggestion
{brandname} Server stores entries in remote caches with the encoding that is set in the cache configuration.

Hot Rod and REST clients include a media type with each request to {brandname} Server; those clients can request data in a different format from storage and the server will do a conversion on-demand if it supports it, otherwise an error is generated. Similarly, when those clients write data to the server in a different format than configured, {brandname} will convert the data the storage format. If the server cannot convert the incoming data to its storage format, an error is also generated.

If you do not configure encoding for remote caches then {brandname} Server assumes keys and values have unknown format, and conversions are done assuming data as generic ```byte[]``` with unknown format.
```

Author: @gustavonalle Hey, just to make sure we don't lose anything - and to keep the review going - I've issued https://github.com/infinispan/infinispan/pull/9327 that includes this comment. Thanks.

[id='encoding']
= Cache encoding
Encoding is the format, or media type, that {brandname} uses to store entries (key/value pairs) in caches.

[discrete]
== Remote caches

{brandname} Server stores entries in remote caches without any media type information by default.

Encoding configures how {brandname} stores entries in a remote cache.

> If you do not configure encoding for remote caches then {brandname} Server stores entries however clients provide them.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure of a better way to word this, but this isn't really correct. If no encoding is specified, then the key/value will be stored as a generic `byte[]` on the server. This isn't necessarily how the clients provided them, as in the case of the HR client, it's likely the key/values were POJOs that were marshalled into `byte[]` so that they could be sent to the server. So the phrase "however clients provide them" may cause the user to think that the key/value is stored as a POJO on the server-side.

Author: How about 

"If you do not configure encoding for remote caches then {brandname} Server stores keys and values as generic `byte[]`.
When clients request entries from caches without any encoding, {brandname} Server returns keys and values as they are stored in the remote cache."

I'm trying to clarify that - without encoding - clients might not be able to handle the entries that the server returns. Would that make sense?

Reviewer 3: Your suggestion is a big improvement I think.

Author: great. thanks!

In this case {brandname} Server also returns entries as they are stored in the remote cache for any client requests.
With encoding, {brandname} converts keys and values, when necessary, to whatever media type you specify for the cache.

[TIP]
====
Always configure an encoding for remote caches if you want to use multiple clients, such as {brandname} Console or CLI, Hot Rod, REST, as well as server-side tasks and scripts.

> {brandname} recommends application/x-protostream`.

Reviewer 4: I would add another ` before applicaiton :)

====

[discrete]
== Embedded caches

{brandname} stores entries in embedded caches as Plain Old Java Objects (POJOs) by default.

Storing POJOs in embedded caches means that object instances are mutable.

> For example if you store a `HashMap` any modifications to the map are seen by other users of the cache, causing race conditions.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure what the mutability of POJOs stored in local caches has todo with marshalling? I think we can remove this paragraph and start the next paragraph as "For clustered embedded ... "

Reviewer 4: This is because the POJO can be accessed and changed as a get(...) will return a reference to the POJO.
If now the cache is clustered and ISPN decides to marshall it for replication it cause rase conditions (like ConncurrentModification for Collection, or inconsistent replication)
So I think it is important to document this as user will run into this

Reviewer 3: Ok I understand now. I think this is an important thing to explain, however I think we need to explain this cenario in more detail and consequently I don't think it should be one of the first things we mention. I think we should first explain that serialization is necessary (currently 3rd paragraph), then have a note explaining that mutable POJOs stored in the cache must be updated by value using a new POJO instance, in order to avoid race conditions when performing serialization.

Author: @ryanemerson and @wfink could you please check the updated wording addresses the review comments?

Reviewer 3: > For example if you store a `HashMap` any modifications to the map are seen by other users of the cache, which leads to race conditions when serialization is performed.

This still isn't correct. How about:

"For example, if you store a `HashMap` as a key/value, any local modifications to the Map are not seen by other cluster members. Furthermore, it's possible that a ConcurrentModificationException could occur if the Map instance is updated whilst the object is being marshalled by {brandname}.

Author: thanks @ryanemerson I've updated the wording here.

> However, for clustered embedded caches, {brandname} needs to serialize any POJOs to a byte array that can be replicated between nodes and then deserialized back into POJOs.

Reviewer 3: Should we be using `Marshalled`/`Unmarshalled` here to be consistent with chapter 2?

> This requires you to configure a marshaller to perform serialization and deserialization for your embedded caches.

Reviewer 3: A marshaller is configured by default .. I think it's more appropriate to say that you need to ensure that your POJOs are serializable via one of our supported marshallers.

Author: How about "This means you must ensure that {brandname} can use a marshaller to serialize and deserialize your POJOs." ?

Not sure if we should say "supported" in community docs. It's also a problematic phrase downstream.

Reviewer 3: "This means that you must ensure that {brandname} is able to serialize your POJOs using the configured marshaller."

You could then re-iterate that if no marshaller is configured, the default is Protostream?

Author: Maybe a more concise wording is "This means you must ensure that {brandname} can serialize your POJOs with the ProtoStream marshaller if you do not configure another marshaller."

Author: @ryanemerson I think the updated changes should do it. would you mind double-checking? thanks.

Reviewer 3: Looks good :+1:

[TIP]
====
Instead of using clustered embedded caches, {brandname} recommends using remote caches and Protobuf encoding.

> Remote caches separate {brandname} cluster configuration from application logic, which greatly reduces complexity.

Reviewer 3: "Utilising remote caches separates state from the application logic, which greatly reduces application complexity and aids scalability."

With encoding, {brandname} converts keys and values, when necessary, to whatever media type you specify for the cache.

[TIP]
====
Always configure an encoding for remote caches if you want to use multiple clients, such as {brandname} Console or CLI, Hot Rod, REST, as well as server-side tasks and scripts.

{brandname} recommends `application/x-protostream`.
====

[discrete]
== Embedded caches

{brandname} stores entries in embedded caches as Plain Old Java Objects (POJOs) by default.

For clustered embedded caches, {brandname} needs to marshall any POJOs to a byte array that can be replicated between nodes and then unmarshalled back into POJOs.
This means you must ensure that {brandname} can serialize your POJOs with the ProtoStream marshaller if you do not configure another marshaller.

[TIP]
====
Instead of using clustered embedded caches, {brandname} recommends using remote caches and Protobuf encoding.
Remote caches separate {brandname} cluster configuration from application logic, which reduces application complexity and improves scalability.
====

[NOTE]
====

> If you store mutable POJOs in embedded caches, you should always update values using new POJO instances to avoid race conditions.

Author: @wburns do you think we should just drop "to avoid race conditions"?

> If you store mutable POJOs in embedded caches, you should always update values using new POJO instances to avoid race conditions.

Reviewer 5: That is probably fine, sure.

> If you store mutable POJOs in embedded caches, you should always update values using new POJO instances to avoid race conditions.

Author: done. thanks. I believe the following sentences address the case you mention "actual updates are only seen by the local node that did the update and not other owners". please let me know if you think more changes are needed here.

[id='encoding']
= Cache encoding
Encoding is the format, or media type, that {brandname} uses to store entries (key/value pairs) in caches.

[discrete]
== Remote caches

> {brandname} Server stores entries in remote caches without any media type information by default.

Author: nice. once again I've adapted a little so not committing this suggestion directly.

> Encoding configures how {brandname} stores entries in a remote cache.

Author: another solid point. I've updated this to incorporate that distinction but I've dropped the details about the different ways you can configure client encoding because I think it's TMI for this paragraph.

> Encoding configures how {brandname} stores entries in a remote cache.

Reviewer 2: TMI was on my mind as well, that's why I didn't make an outright change suggestion :)

> If you do not configure encoding for remote caches then {brandname} Server stores keys and values as generic `byte[]`.

Author: I see what you mean and have reworded a little. Thanks again for the details here.

> When clients request entries from caches without any encoding, {brandname} Server returns keys and values as they are stored in the remote cache.

Author: @danberindei thanks for this! I've reworded a little so didn't commit your suggestion directly.

> With encoding, {brandname} converts keys and values, when necessary, to whatever media type you specify for the cache.

Author: cool. I've made these changes but with my own wording. :grin:

[TIP]
====
Always configure an encoding for remote caches if you want to use multiple clients, such as {brandname} Console or CLI, Hot Rod, REST, as well as server-side tasks and scripts.

{brandname} recommends `application/x-protostream`.
====

[discrete]
== Embedded caches

{brandname} stores entries in embedded caches as Plain Old Java Objects (POJOs) by default.

For clustered embedded caches, {brandname} needs to marshall any POJOs to a byte array that can be replicated between nodes and then unmarshalled back into POJOs.
This means you must ensure that {brandname} can serialize your POJOs with the ProtoStream marshaller if you do not configure another marshaller.

[TIP]
====
Instead of using clustered embedded caches, {brandname} recommends using remote caches and Protobuf encoding.

> Remote caches separate {brandname} cluster configuration from application logic, which reduces application complexity and allows cached data to scale separately to your applications.

Author: ok. I'll remove this.
